RPCs
====

iTerm2 offers a very powerful facility where a script (typically a daemon)
registers a function as available to be invoked by iTerm2.

For example, suppose you want to bind a keystroke to clear all history in all
sessions.

This script shows a working example:

.. code-block:: python

    #!/usr/bin/env python3

    import iterm2

    async def main(connection):
        app = await iterm2.async_get_app(connection)

        @iterm2.RPC
        async def clear_all_sessions():
            code = b'\x1b' + b']1337;ClearScrollback' + b'\x07'
            for window in app.windows:
                for tab in window.tabs:
                    for session in tab.sessions:
                        await session.async_inject(code)
        await clear_all_sessions.async_register(connection)

    iterm2.run_forever(main)

A lot of this should look familiar from the :doc:`daemons` example. Let's focus
on the parts we haven't seen before.

This call defines the RPC:

.. code-block:: python

        @iterm2.RPC
        async def clear_all_sessions():

This function definition is modified by the `@iterm2.RPC` decorator. It adds a
`register` value to the function which is a coroutine that registers the
function as an RPC. Here's how you call it:

.. code-block:: python

        await clear_all_sessions.async_register(connection)

This exploits a quirk of Python that functions are capable of having values
attached to them in this way.

Registered RPCs like this one exist in a single global name space. An RPC is
identified by the combination of its name (`clear_all_sessions`, in thise case)
and its arguments' names, ignoring their order. Keep this in mind to avoid
naming conflicts. Python's reflection features are used to determine the
function's name and argument names.

Your RPC may need information about the context in which it is run. For
example, knowing the unique identifier of the session in which a key was
pressed that invoked the RPC would allow you to perform actions on that
session.

Your RPC may take a special kind of default parameter value that gets filled in
with the value of a variable at the time of invocation. Suppose you want to get
the session ID in which an RPC was invoked. You could register it this way:

.. code-block:: python

        @iterm2.RPC
        async def clear_session(session_id=iterm2.Reference("id")):
            code = b'\x1b' + b']1337;ClearScrollback' + b'\x07'
            session = app.get_session_by_id(session_id)
            if session:
                await session.async_inject(code)
        await clear_session.async_register(connection)

The function invocation will not be made if the variable is undefined.
If you'd prefer a value of `None` instead in such a case, use a question mark
to indicate an optional value, like this: `Reference("id?")`.

The "id" is a variable that exists in the session's scope. To learn more about
how variables work and which variables are defined, see
`Scripting Fundamentals <https://www.iterm2.com/documentation-scripting-fundamentals.html>`_

Invocation
----------

To invoke an RPC, create a key binding for it. Go to **Preferences > Keys** and
click the + button. Select **Invoke Script Function** as the action and enter a
function call in the field beneath it. Like this:

.. image:: bind_cls.png

Then press the associated keystroke and the function will be invoked.

You can also bind a trigger to invoke a function automatically:

.. image:: trigger_cls.png

REPL
----

You can test RPCs defined in the REPL. First, define them as usual. When the
RPC gets invoked, the REPL must allow the event loop to run so it can handle
the request from iTerm2. The simplest way is to tell it to watch for requests
for a set period of time, like this:

.. code-block:: python

    await app.connection.async_dispatch_for_duration(1)

The argument of `1` is how long to wait in seconds. Requests to execute
registered functions wait in a queue until they can be handled. That means you
can press a key in iTerm2 to invoke the RPC and then do
`async_dispatch_for_duration(0.1)` and it will be handled immediately.

Arguments
---------

Registered RPCs may take arguments. Any argument may take a value of
of `None`, so take care to handle that possibility.

When an RPC is invoked, it uses a slightly different syntax than Python. That's
because iTerm2's scripting interface is meant to be language-agnostic (although
at the time of writing there are only Python bindings).

Here's what a function invocation might look like:

.. code-block:: python

    my_function_name(session: id, favorite_number: 123, nickname: "Joe")

The name of the function and the name of each argument is an *Identifier*.
Identifiers begin with a letter and may contain letters, numbers, and
underscore. Every character must be ASCII.

Each argument must have a distinct name.

The value passed to an argument must be an expression. The most common types of
expressions are:

1. A *variable reference*, like `id`.

A variable is a named piece of data attached to a session, tab, window, or the
iTerm2 application itself. Some are defined by iTerm2, like `id`, which
takes a string value that uniquely identifies a session. Others, beginning with
`user.` may be defined by the user.

For a full list of the iTerm2-defined variables, see
`Variables <https://www.iterm2.com/documentation-variables.html>`_.

To set a user-defined variable, you can use a control sequence or call
:meth:`iterm2.Session.async_set_variable`. Variables can take any type JSON can
describe.

A reference to an unset variable raises an error, preventing the function call
from being made. If you modify the path to end with `?` that signals it is
optional. Optional variables, when unset, are passed as `None` to the Python
function.

If a terminal session does not have keyboard focus then no `session.` variables
will be available.

2. A number, like `123`.

Numbers are integers or floating point numbers. They can be negative, and you
can use scientific notation.

3. A string, like `"Joe"`.

Strings are escaped like JSON, using backslash. Strings may contain embedded
expressions. For more information on this, see the *Interpolated Strings*
section of
`Scripting Fundamentals <https://www.iterm2.com/documentation-scripting-fundamentals.html>`_.

4. The result of a function call.

For more details, see Composition_.

`Scripting Fundamentals <https://www.iterm2.com/documentation-scripting-fundamentals.html>`_
goes in to more detail on expressions.

Timeouts
--------

By default, iTerm2 stops waiting for a function's result after five seconds.
The function continues to run until completion. You can pass an optional
`timeout` parameter to `async_register` to set your own timeout value in
seconds.

.. _Composition:

Composition
-----------

Function invocations may use composition. A registered function can return a
value which the becomes an argument to a subsequent function call. Here's a
snippet of an example, which you can add to the `main` function of the previous
example:

.. code-block:: python

    @iterm2.RPC
    async def add(a, b):
        return a + b
    await add.async_register(connection)

    @iterm2.RPC
    async def times(a, b):
        return a * b
    await times.async_register(connection)

    @iterm2.RPC
    async def show(s):
        session = app.current_window.current_tab.current_session
        await session.async_inject(bytes(str(s), encoding="utf-8"))
    await show.async_register(connection)


To compute 1+2*3 and inject it into the current session, use this invocation:

.. code-block:: python

    show(s: add(a: 1, b: times(a: 2, b: 3)))

Note that if there are invocations that have no dependencies, they may run
concurrently. There is no guarantee on the order of invocations except that an
RPC will not be made until all its dependencies have completed without errors.

Errors are propagated up the call chain and shown in an alert with a traceback.

Continue to the next section, :doc:`hooks`.

----

--------------
Other Sections
--------------

* :doc:`/index`
    * :doc:`index`
    * :doc:`example`
    * :doc:`running`
    * :doc:`daemons`
    * RPCs
    * :doc:`hooks`
    * :doc:`troubleshooting`

Indices and tables
==================

* :ref:`genindex`
* :ref:`search`
